Notes/transcript for presentation.

File: bat-training2.pdf

Slide 1: no notes

Slide 2 + 3: In this course we will dive deeper into some of the nitty gritty
details of GPL compliance engineering. We will look into examining individual
files in depth, for example determining the type of a file, finding runtime
dependencies of dynamically linked executables, extracting human readable
strings from binary files and function names from dynamically linked
executables. We will also look a bit into how these things are done in BAT.

Slide 4: Some files are especially interesting from a software license
compliance perspective, because they were generated from source code under a
FLOSS license: executables, libraries, and Linux kernel images are prime
examples of files that are good candidates for analysis.

Of course, other files, like graphics, text, audio and video, can also be
covered by copyright, or licenses like Creative Commons but this is outside of
the scope of this course.

Slide 5: To help decide quickly which files you should analyse it helps to
determine what a file actually is: is it an executable, or a text file, or a
graphics file, and so on, so you can focus on the important files and skip
the uninteresting files.

A good first guess can be made by running the command "file" on the actual
file. This program uses a database with signatures of common files. This works
well for most files on systems, since a single file is indeed of a single
type.

Slide 6: no comments

Slide 7: There are instances where "file" does not work correctly, for example
if two files have been concatenated, which is what happens frequently in for
example firmware images, or if a certain file type has no clear identifiers
like with the YAFFS2 file system, or if the magic database on the system lacks
the identifier.

In those cases "file" will not work correctly. That does not make it less
useful though.

Slide 8: In the Binary Analysis Tool a few extra verification steps are taken
to deal with for example concatenation of files. The output from "file" and the
underlying "libmagic" library is still used for reporting and sometimes for
verification, but never as the sole method for determining the type of a file.

BAT also takes a more conservative approach: if there is not enough certainty
to conclude a certain file type, then no file type is concluded and the file is
treated as an opaque object with bytes.

Slide 9-10-11-12: ELF executables (ELF is the executable format used on
virtually all current Linux systems) are sometimes "dynamically linked" to
libraries. This is an optimisation to save space on the storage of a device
(libraries can be shared between applications), plus in memory during
execution.

It is very important for licensing conditions to find out to which libraries
the executable is linked. There are various tools to find out. The best one to
inspect an ELF executable is readelf.

Most people know "ldd" but this is not the right choice, since it actually
invokes the dynamic linker on the system that is used to analyse to resolve the
dependencies, which is likely to give incorrect results.

Slide 13: no comments

Slide 14: Most evidence of the presence of a particular piece of software
inside a program is extract string constants from the binary and comparing
these to source code.

String constants include output messages and error messages, and so on. These
are reliable, because the compiler does not remove these from the binary. Using
the "strings" program it is possible to extract ASCII characters frm the
binary.

Slide 15: no comments

Slide 16: Matching strings is often not difficult. Sometimes there are hints
that make it very clear that a certain program was used, such as copyright
messages, or URLs, or program names.

Another good way is to find a string that looks quite unique and to search for
it using a search engine. Quite often it only takes a few searches to find out
which program was used.

Of course, this can be automated and this is what BAT can do.

Slide 17: The presence of a single unique match (or seemingly unique match) is
not a good base to draw conclusions. The more unique matches you can find, the
stronger the evidence is. Often it is possible to find dozens, and in some
cases even hundreds or thousands of unique matches.

Slide 18:

Slide 19:

Slide 20:

Slide 21: no comments

Slide 22:

Slide 23:

Slide 24:

Slide 25: no comments
